Hello, hello hello, and welcome to English Learning for Curious
Minds, by Leonardo English.
The show where you can listen to
fascinating stories, and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today we
are going to be talking about a man
who climbed to the upper echelons
of the British establishment.
A man whose face for decades beamed
into living rooms across Britain
during a successful television career.
A man instantly recognisable for his
bleached-blonde hair, array of tracksuits
and jewellery, and the cigar almost
permanently hanging from his mouth.
He was an acclaimed charity worker
and fundraiser who was widely
viewed as a ‘national treasure’.
And a man who maintained personal
relationships with the British
Royal Family and the country’s
most powerful politicians.
But, he was also a man
with a very dark side.
A man who committed some of the
most heinous sex crimes in British
history, and used his influence
and status to avoid punishment.
A man, or monster, who lived his
entire life hidden in plain sight.
I am talking, of course,
about Jimmy Savile.
So, let’s get right into it and
talk about Jimmy Savile, the
man who tricked the country.
On the 16th of April, 1990, King
Charles III - who was then just plain
old Prince Charles - wrote to Jimmy
Savile, asking for advice on a speech.
“Can you cast an eye over this draft
and let me know how you think we can
best appeal to people on this score?”
“You are so good at understanding
what makes people operate,” the
King added, “and you're wonderfully
sceptical and practical."
The letter, it would be revealed many
years later, was just one of hundreds the
future King exchanged with the former-DJ
and charity fundraiser over the years.
But his influence didn’t stop there.
Savile also cultivated close personal
relationships with politicians,
particularly the former Prime
Minister, Margaret Thatcher.
He reportedly celebrated New Year with the
Thatcher family at the Prime Minister’s
country estate, Chequers, and in the
1980s Thatcher even wrote to Savile to
reassure him that some of the changes
he wanted to charity funding rules were
getting her full and personal attention.
Changes that were, in the end,
eventually included in one of
the British government’s budgets.
This former DJ and nightclub manager
not only advised future kings, but had
a hand in influencing government policy.
But how did this happen?
How did a former coal miner from Leeds, a
man that would later be revealed to be one
of the worst sexual predators in British
history, rise to such power and influence?
How did he trick the nation?
How did he get away with it for so long?
James Wilson Vincent Savile was
born on October the 31st, 1926,
in Leeds, in the West Riding of
Yorkshire, in northern England.
He was the youngest of seven
children, born to Vincent Joseph
Savile, a bookmaker's clerk, and
his wife, Agnes Monica Kelly.
Savile was from a working-class
background, in an already not
wealthy part of the country.
His childhood was so poor, in fact,
that he later claimed that his Christmas
present was a trip to the shops to
look at toys through the window.
His schooling was brief, ending
at the age of 15, when he left
to briefly work in an office.
This was right in the middle of
the Second World War, and Savile
was conscripted to work in coal
mines to support the war effort.
It was dangerous work, and he
had a bad spinal injury, he
damaged the bones in his back.
The injury was so bad, in fact, that
it took him years to be properly back
on his feet, and he was told that
he would never walk properly again.
But recover he did, and once he had
recovered from his injuries Savile
first became a scrap metal dealer,
before becoming a DJ, playing
records in dance halls around Leeds.
Playing the latest releases, and with the
country finally at peace again, Savile’s
events became a hit and he quickly
started managing a large dance hall.
By the late 1950s he was running the
entertainment at 45 ballrooms across
the country, and though popular and
seen as a bit quirky, or a little
strange, Savile’s no-nonsense approach
to troublemakers at his dance halls
already revealed his darker side.
Drunks and troublemakers would be,
as Savile would later admit, tied up
in a boiler room and left for hours.
And even back then, as early as
the 1950s, there were allegations
about Savile’s behaviour,
particularly towards young girls.
A bouncer, or doorman, in one of
Savile’s Mecca dance halls recalled,
many years later, that Savile was due
in court for, in his words, "messing
about with a couple of girls".
When the bouncer later asked what
happened, he was told: "It never got
to court - they dropped the charges."
Asking how he managed to get away with
it, he was told Savile “did what he
did last time - he paid them off.'"
If you pay someone off, it means you
pay them money to stop doing something,
or to avoid talking about something.
So, even back then, before his fame,
Savile was, the doorman said, "a very
powerful man with a lot of influence."
This influence would only grow when,
in 1958, he moved into radio and
became a DJ on Radio Luxembourg.
If you’re thinking, hang on, “Radio
Luxembourg” that sounds like a
strange name, you’d be right.
Radio Luxembourg was a radio station
based in Luxembourg, but at this time
it mainly broadcast to the UK due to a
British law that gave the BBC a monopoly.
So, the point here is that Savile didn’t
suddenly turn into a Luxembourgish
DJ, his listeners were in the UK.
And he was soon one of the leading
British DJs on the radio, with 6
shows a week and his Saturday show
attracting 6 million listeners, more
than 10% of the country’s population.
But the radio was only the
start for Jimmy Savile.
In 1960 Savile began working in
the latest media trend, television.
On the 1st of January, 1964,
Savile presented the first episode
of Top of the Pops, on the BBC.
If you haven’t heard of Top of the
Pops, it was a weekly show where the
country’s most famous bands would play.
Anyone who was anyone played Top of
the Pops: The Beatles, The Rolling
Stones, David Bowie, Beyonce, Madonna,
the Jackson 5, it was the most famous
musical programme in the country and
was a pillar of British popular culture
And Jimmy Saville presented it for
20 years, cementing his position
as the country’s most famous, and
for some, most loved, TV presenter.
As his fame grew, Savile began
cultivating his public persona and
image, draping himself in jewellery
and tracksuits, and becoming known for
his wacky, slightly strange demeanour.
Alongside this, he was one of
the country’s most notorious
charity fundraisers, doing runs,
setting up charities, and raising
an estimated £40 million pounds,
so almost €50 million Euros for
charity over the course of his life.
But as Savile rubbed shoulders with
some of pop music’s biggest stars and
raised money for good causes, rumours
about his private life - in particular,
his inappropriate behaviour towards
underage girls - began circulating.
A man called Roger Holt, a music
industry insider who regularly
visited the Radio 1 offices during
the 1960s, would later reveal that
everyone knew what Savile was doing.
Savile, Holt claimed, would invite
“young girls into his Rolls Royce or the
caravan when he was travelling around.”
It was, Holt said, “an open
secret in the record industry."
In 1973, with the rumours becoming more
common, the BBC’s press team checked
with British newspapers whether they were
planning to report on Savile’s behaviour.
Incredibly, though many newspapers were
aware of the allegations they were not
going to print them because Savile was
a loved public figure, who had been
seen to raise so much money for charity.
In fact, Savile used his charity work
as a means to manipulate the press
into not reporting the allegations
against him, suggesting that they
would be responsible for the end of
his charity fundraising if they did.
His quirky public persona combined
with his charity work allowed him
to hide in plain sight, and his
fund-raising activities also gave
him easy access to hospitals, schools
and prisons, institutions housing
some of society’s most vulnerable
He even had a bedroom at Stoke Mandeville
hospital in Buckinghamshire, where his
charitable trust was headquartered, as
well as an office and bedroom at Broadmoor
psychiatric hospital in Berkshire.
After his death, it emerged that
both of these sites were where
many of his crimes had taken place.
Yet publicly Savile’s profile continued
to grow, and in 1975 he got the job
that he would be most remembered for
and, sickeningly, would not only endear
him to, but also give him access to
millions of children across Britain.
This job was his own TV
show called ‘Jim’ll Fix It’.
It was a children’s TV show
that encouraged kids to write to
Savile with a wish that would come
true at the end of each episode.
Jim, Jimmy Savile, would literally
make their dreams come true.
As you might imagine, kids loved
him, and a generation of young
Brits grew up wishing for Jim
to make their dreams come true.
Yet, as he established himself as the
nation’s most popular children’s TV
presenter and mingled with high-society
figures, the rumours of sexual abuse
showed no signs of abating, of dying down.
Many began to question Savile’s private
life, wondering why such a rich,
well-known and much-loved celebrity
had always been single and seemed to
prefer to spend his time with children
in hospitals, schools, and prisons.
Unfortunately, his motives were
far from pure, and I’m sorry but
this is where I have to go into
some uncomfortable territory.
Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, Savile is
alleged to have sexually abused hundreds
of people, many of them vulnerable
children, all while maintaining his
public facade, or image, as a wacky
but kind-hearted charity fundraiser.
There were even rumours of Savile
spending time in hospital mortuaries,
where dead bodies are kept, and years
later evidence would emerge of his
unhealthy interest in dead bodies.
Yet, despite these absolutely vile
rumours and allegations, which were
now so numerous that they should have
been taken seriously, his career and
public profile continued to grow.
In 1988, Savile was even appointed by
the Department of Health to a task force
overseeing Broadmoor prison, a place where
he habitually abused vulnerable people.
In 1990 Savile was knighted by the Queen
and made Sir Jimmy Savile for his charity
work, and he was given a Papal Knighthood
by Pope John Paul II the same year.
It would later transpire that his friend,
Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, had
repeatedly tried to get him knighted
back in the 1980s despite the widespread
concerns about his private life.
Some have speculated that Savile’s
endless charity work was a means of
misdirection, of making people think
that he was doing all of this good work,
raising all of this money for charity,
so surely he couldn’t be an evil man.
His fundraising, some say, was done
with the aim of getting his knighthood
- something Savile hoped would make him
untouchable, as it would have been so
embarrassing for the British establishment
to admit that someone it had made a Sir
would have committed such atrocious acts.
Others have speculated that, given that
he was a devout Catholic, doing all of
this “good work”, the charity work, was a
way of atoning for his sins, so that the
good would counterbalance all of the evil.
Whatever his motivations, it’s
clear that he was a monster hiding
in plain sight, hiding on the
country's television screens.
So, how did he get away with it?
The warning signs were clearly there,
there were plenty of accusations,
and he almost seemed to publicly
admit to it when he was asked, saying
things like "I’m feared in every
girls' school in this country."
He would almost shock people with
his responses that seemed so horrible
they couldn’t be true, but they were.
So, to go back to our earlier
question, how did he get away with it?
Well, one theory is that he was
simply too famous, too loved.
As a national treasure and a public
face of the BBC, even those who
knew or suspected what he was up
to were too afraid to speak out.
In an inquiry released after his
death, it was concluded that BBC
bosses were “more worried about their
reputation than the safety of children.”
Yet, during the 2000s Savile’s reputation
began to change from oddball, or
strange person, to creepy old man.
Remember, he was born in 1926,
so he is almost in his 80s now.
In a documentary made in the year 2000,
the filmmaker Louis Theroux visited
one of Savile’s homes and discovered
his morbid obsession with his mother
almost 30 years after she had died.
Savile, it was revealed, still kept
his mother’s clothes in her wardrobe
as they had been when she had died,
and had remained alone with her
dead body for 5 days after her death
In the documentary, Theroux also directly
challenged Savile on the long-standing
allegations of his paedophilia.
“How do they know whether I am or not?"
Savile responded.
"How does anybody know whether I am?
"Nobody knows,” he said,
“whether I am or not.”
It certainly seems a strange way
of responding to the question,
he never actually denied it.
By this time though, the police
had sufficient evidence to bring
Savile to court, but no charges
were ever brought against him.
In 2008 Savile was named in a police
investigation into child abuse at a
children's home in Jersey, but…nothing
came of it, and in 2009 the Crown
Prosecution Service investigated
four allegations against him from the
1970s, but did not pursue the case.
Savile was even interviewed under police
caution but claimed the victims invented
the crimes to get money from him.
As always, for one of the most
recognisable faces on British TV,
the allegations had no impact.
And they never would, at
least when he was alive.
On the 29th of October, 2011, two
days before his 85th birthday, in his
flat in Leeds, Savile was found dead.
Almost immediately afterwards, a
flood of allegations emerged from
victims who had been too scared to
come forward while Savile was alive.
The details of their claims, as well
as the sheer number of them, rocked
the British establishment to its core.
By October of 2012, the police were
investigating 400 potential lines
of inquiry with over 200 witnesses.
The allegations against Savile, police
said, were "on an unprecedented scale".
There were far too many for there to be
any doubt that this man was one of the
country’s most prolific sex offenders.
By November, the number of alleged
victims had risen to 450, and the
police were investigating 199 crimes
in 17 different parts of the country.
And this is only people who have
come forward and said something
- presumably for everyone who has come
forward and said they were abused by
Savile, there are many, many more.
Chillingly, 80 percent of the victims
were children or teenagers at the
time, and there are reports of
completely horrible things, including
necrophilia, having sex with dead people.
This clearly put the BBC, the national
broadcaster and an organisation that had
employed and protected Savile for half
a century, in a complicated position.
It shouldn’t have been complicated,
you could rightly say, and
the behaviour of the BBC would
come to be deeply criticised.
In the aftermath of his death,
journalists at the BBC began an
investigation into how he was allowed
to go unchecked for so long, but instead
of supporting this investigation,
BBC bosses ordered the journalists
to stop looking into the allegations.
Instead, on the 11th of November the
BBC aired a tribute to Savile, and
the BBC itself became the subject of
investigations by other media outlets.
It turned out that the
BBC had protected Savile.
Senior BBC staff knew what he was
doing, almost certainly, but stopped
any investigations because they were
afraid of the reputational damage
it could cause the institution.
As more and more allegations emerged,
BBC bosses were forced to step down,
or resign, and police investigations
continued across the country.
Questions were asked of top
politicians and the Royal Family.
How was it possible that Savile
had moved in such powerful
circles and nobody had known?
Many in Britain simply refused
to believe it, did people
really not suspect anything?
There were calls for his knighthood to be
withdrawn, and episodes of Top of the Pops
presented by Savile were taken off screen.
Finally, after decades of sexual
abuse and peadophilia, the real
Jimmy Savile had come to light.
He might have died before earthly
justice could be done, but after
his death there could be no doubt
about the extent of his crimes.
He could hide no more.
The man who had tricked, or groomed,
an entire nation - including its royal
family and political elites - had
been revealed for who he really was:
a monster hiding in plain sight.
OK Then, that is it for today’s
episode on Jimmy Savile, the
man who tricked a nation.
It's an uncomfortable subject, I
know, but it’s an important one.
It’s also completely mad to think
how a man who was the most famous TV
presenter in the country by a huge margin
was never truly brought to justice.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
Had you heard about Jimmy Savile before?
Why do you think he never faced
any consequences for his actions,
despite the rumours about him?
And what do you think this
says about British society?
I would love to know, so let’s
get this discussion started.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds, by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.